docs: ABCI 2.0 tutorial (#1374)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/tutorials/forum-application/3.send-message.md

# Send Message

> 

Reviewer: Please, include a paragraph somewhere saying that, for this code to be complete, we need to add signatures to transactions (both messages and ban TXs).
If would also be good IMO to add comments in the code pointing where the signature verification would take place (although I'm not sure that would help understanding).

Reviewer: Is this mentioned somewhere in the updated PR?

**In this section you will learn how a user can send a message on the Forum Application.**

## CheckTx

In ABCI, the `CheckTx` method is used to check the validity of an individual transaction before it is included in the mempool.
Every node runs CheckTx before letting a transaction into its local mempool.

The `CheckTx` method is responsible for performing any necessary validation checks on the transaction, such as verifying
the signature, checking for double spending, or enforcing application-specific rules. It is a lightweight and fast
operation, as it is meant to quickly determine whether a transaction is valid or not.

The method takes in a `RequestCheckTx` object, which contains the transaction to be checked (`req.Tx`) and any other
relevant information that the application needs to validate the transaction.

The `CheckTx` method should return a `ResponseCheckTx` object, which indicates whether the transaction is valid or not.
If the transaction is valid, the response may include additional information about the transaction

> or any changes to the application state resulting from the validation.

Reviewer: > changes to the application state

Are you sure `ResponseCheckTx` contains this?

**Following is the code for the `CheckTx` method:**

```go
// CheckTx handles validation of inbound transactions. If a transaction is not a valid message, or if a user
// does not exist in the database or if a user is banned it returns an error
func (app ForumApp) CheckTx(_ context.Context, req *abci.CheckTxRequest) (*abci.CheckTxResponse, error) {

>     fmt.Println("Executing Application CheckTx")

Reviewer: Can we replace `fmt.Println` by a logger (all over)?

Reviewer 2: I didn't want to because it was a lot of work. But I did anyways, I think it looks better. But big refactoring of the app code and updating the code in the docs is cumbersome. In the future need to think a better way to handle these. But I replaced everything with log messages. 😅

    // Parse the tx message

> 	msg, err := model.ParseMessage(req.Tx)

Reviewer: Indentation is off here

	if err != nil {
		fmt.Printf("failed to parse transaction message req: %v\n", err)
		return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeInvalidTxFormat, Log: "Invalid transaction format"}, nil
	}

> 	fmt.Println("Searching for sender ... ", msg.Sender)

Reviewer: Please check that the sender is not `nil`

	u, err := app.state.DB.FindUserByName(msg.Sender)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

	if err != nil {
		if !errors.Is(err, badger.ErrKeyNotFound) {
			fmt.Println("problem in check tx: ", string(req.Tx))

> 			return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeEncodingError}, nil

Reviewer: Can you fill up the `Log` field as you do in line 33?

		}
		fmt.Println("Not found user :", msg.Sender)

> 	} else {
> 		if u != nil && u.Banned {
> 			return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeBanned, Log: "User is banned"}, nil
> 		}
> 	}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	}
	if u == nil {
		return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeNilUser, Log: "User cannot be nil"}, nil
	}
	if u.Banned {
		return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeBanned, Log: "User is banned"}, nil
	}
```

	fmt.Println("Check tx success for ", msg.Message, " and ", msg.Sender)
	return &abci.CheckTxResponse{Code: CodeTypeOK}, nil
}
```

**Explanation of code:**

`CheckTx` function parses the transaction message contained in `req.Tx` using the `model.ParseMessage` function. If
there is an error parsing the message, it prints an error message and returns a response with an error code indicating
an invalid transaction format.

> Then it, searches for a user in the database using the `app.state.DB.FindUserByName` function. If the user is not found,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, it searches for a user in the database using the `app.state.DB.FindUserByName` function. If the user is not found,
```

it prints a message indicating that the user was not found. If there is an error other than a key not found error,
it prints an error message and returns a response with an error code indicating an encoding error.

If the user is found and is not banned, it returns a response with a success code (`CodeTypeOK` which in CometBFT a `0`
code value to indicate success).

Finally, it prints a success message indicating the success of the check transaction.

> *Tip: The function `CheckTx` is a stateless function that is primarily used by the application to check if the a tx is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Tip: The function `CheckTx` is a stateless function that is primarily used by the application to check if a tx is
```

Reviewer: > `CheckTx` is a stateless

But you are looking up the user in the state...

application needs to generate the proposal.

The `PrepareProposal` method should return a `PrepareProposalResponse` object, which includes the proposed block contents.
This typically includes the list of transactions (txs) that should be included in the next block.

**Following is the code for the `PrepareProposal` method:**

```go
// PrepareProposal is used to prepare a proposal for the next block in the blockchain. The application can re-order, remove
// or add transactions
func (app *ForumApp) PrepareProposal(_ context.Context, req *abci.PrepareProposalRequest) (*abci.PrepareProposalResponse, error) {
    fmt.Println("Executing Application PrepareProposal")

	// Get the curse words from the vote extensions
	voteExtensionCurseWords := app.getWordsFromVe(req.LocalLastCommit.Votes)

	// Prepare req puts the BanTx first, then adds the other transactions
	// ProcessProposal should verify this
	proposedTxs := make([][]byte, 0)
	finalProposal := make([][]byte, 0)
	bannedUsersString := make(map[string]struct{})
	for _, tx := range req.Txs {
		msg, err := model.ParseMessage(tx)
		if err != nil {

> 			continue

Reviewer: Add a log?

		}
		// Adding the curse words from vote extensions too
		if !hasCurseWord(msg.Message, voteExtensionCurseWords) {

> 			proposedTxs = append(proposedTxs, tx)

Reviewer: If you add a `continue` here, you can get rid of the `else` and all its indentation, which makes the code hard to follow

		} else {
			// If the message contains curse words then ban the user by
			// creating a "ban transaction" and adding it to the final proposal
			banTx := model.BanTx{UserName: msg.Sender}
			bannedUsersString[msg.Sender] = struct{}{}
			resultBytes, err := json.Marshal(banTx)
			if err == nil {
				finalProposal = append(finalProposal, resultBytes)
			} else {
				// the ban transaction will not be included in the final proposal
				fmt.Println("ban transaction failed to marshal in PrepareProposal")
			}
		}
	}

	// Need to loop again through the proposed Txs to make sure there is none left by a user that was banned
	// after the tx was accepted
	for _, tx := range proposedTxs {
		// there should be no error here as these are just transactions we have checked and added
		msg, err := model.ParseMessage(tx)
		if err != nil {

> 			fmt.Println("failed to parse message in PrepareProposal")

Reviewer: So what happens if we continue here? Is the state "same" after hitting this condition?

		} else {

> 			// If the user is banned then include this transaction in the final proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			// If the user is not banned then include this transaction in the final proposal
```

			if _, ok := bannedUsersString[msg.Sender]; !ok {
				finalProposal = append(finalProposal, tx)
			}
		}
	}
	return &abci.PrepareProposalResponse{Txs: finalProposal}, nil
}
```

**Explanation of code:**

> `PrepareProposal` function first retrieves curse words from a `vote extension.` Then, it iterates over the transactions

Reviewer: > retrieves curse words from a `vote extension.`

This is not accurate. It retrieves the curse words for all vote extensions received at the end of last height.
Actually, the original use case here is that only words that are flagged as curse words by > 1/3 of validators are actually considered curse words. This is done to present malicious validators from introducing "normal" words as curse words.

In this section you will learn about `app.go` file only.

## ProcessProposal

The `ProcessProposal` method is used to process a proposal for the next block in the blockchain. It is called by
CometBFT to request the application to validate and potentially execute the proposed block.

The `ProcessProposal` method is responsible for performing any necessary validation checks on the proposed block, such
as verifying the validity of the included transactions, checking for double spending, or enforcing application-specific
rules (as defined by the application).

The method takes in a `ProcessProposalRequest` object, which contains the proposed block contents, including the list of
transactions (`req.Txs`) that are included in the block.

The `ProcessProposal` method should return a `ProcessProposalResponse` object, which includes a status if the the proposed block
was accepted (`PROCESS_PROPOSAL_STATUS_ACCEPT`) or rejected (`PROCESS_PROPOSAL_STATUS_REJECT`)

**Following is the code for the `ProcessProposal` function:**

```go
// ProcessProposal validates the proposed block and the transactions and return a status if it was accepted or rejected

> func (app *ForumApp) ProcessProposal(_ context.Context, req *abci.ProcessProposalRequest) (*abci.ProcessProposalResponse, error) {

Reviewer: `ProcessProposal` must verify that `PreparePropsal` did the right thing... e.g., `ProcessProposal` should detect if `PreparePropsal` banned a user unfairly

		}
	}
	return &abci.ProcessProposalResponse{Status: abci.PROCESS_PROPOSAL_STATUS_ACCEPT}, nil
}
```

**Explanation of code:**

`ProcessProposal` function initializes an empty map called `bannedUsers` to keep track of banned user names.

Then, it iterates through the transactions and checks if each transaction is a ban transaction using the `isBanTx` function.
If it is a ban transaction, it parses the transaction into a `BanTx` struct and adds the banned user's name to the `bannedUsers` map.
If it is not a ban transaction, it breaks out of the loop and records the index of the last ban transaction.

After that, it iterates through the remaining transactions (starting from the index after the last ban transaction) and
parses each transaction using the `model.ParseMessage` function. If any banned user attempts to send a transaction,
it rejects the proposal.

Finally, if there are no banned users found in the transactions, it accepts the proposal.

*Tip: The function `ProcessProposal` is used by state replication to indicate to the application to process the tx.
The application can process a tx in accordance to the logic defined by the application. Although the application can

> perform 'optimisitic execeution', the application is not mandated to do so.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
perform 'optimisitic execution', the application is not mandated to do so.*
```

Note: You will learn about different packages and functions like `isBanTx` in the upcoming sections. In this section
you will learn about `app.go` file only.

## FinalizeBlock

> The `FinalizeBlock` method is used to finalize a block in the blockchain. It is called by CometBFT after all the transactions
> in a block have been processed and the block is ready to be added to the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `FinalizeBlock` method is used to finalize a block in the blockchain. It is called by CometBFT after the validators have agreed on the 
next block and it is ready to be added to the blockchain.
```

```go
// Deliver the decided block to the Application
func (app *ForumApp) FinalizeBlock(_ context.Context, req *abci.FinalizeBlockRequest) (*abci.FinalizeBlockResponse, error) {
	fmt.Println("Executing Application FinalizeBlock")

	// Iterate over Tx in current block
	app.onGoingBlock = app.state.DB.GetDB().NewTransaction(true)
	respTxs := make([]*abci.ExecTxResult, len(req.Txs))
	finishedBanTxIdx := len(req.Txs)
	for i, tx := range req.Txs {
		var err error

		if isBanTx(tx) {
			banTx := new(model.BanTx)
			err = json.Unmarshal(tx, &banTx)
			if err != nil {
				respTxs[i] = &abci.ExecTxResult{Code: CodeTypeEncodingError}
			} else {
				err := UpdateOrSetUser(app.state.DB, banTx.UserName, true, app.onGoingBlock)
				if err != nil {
					panic(err)
				}
				respTxs[i] = &abci.ExecTxResult{Code: CodeTypeOK}
			}
		} else {
			finishedBanTxIdx = i
			break
		}
	}

	for idx, tx := range req.Txs[finishedBanTxIdx:] {
		// From this point on, there should be no BanTxs anymore
		// If there is one, ParseMessage will return an error as the
		// format of the two transactions is different.
		msg, err := model.ParseMessage(tx)
		i := idx + finishedBanTxIdx
		if err != nil {

> 			respTxs[i] = &abci.ExecTxResult{Code: CodeTypeEncodingError}

Reviewer: Again, this should never happen. If it happens, an important bug exists in the application, so we should probably panic here, not continue.

		} else {

> 			// Check if this sender already existed; if not, add the user too

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			// Check if this sender already exists; if not, add the user too
```

			err := UpdateOrSetUser(app.state.DB, msg.Sender, false, app.onGoingBlock)
			if err != nil {

> 				panic(err)

Reviewer 2: good point, will replace them

			}
			// Add the message for this sender
			message, err := model.AppendToExistingMsgs(app.state.DB, *msg)
			if err != nil {
				panic(err)
			}
			app.onGoingBlock.Set([]byte(msg.Sender+"msg"), []byte(message))
			chatHistory, err := model.AppendToChat(app.state.DB, *msg)
			if err != nil {
				panic(err)
			}
			// Append messages to chat history
			app.onGoingBlock.Set([]byte("history"), []byte(chatHistory))
			// This adds the user to the DB, but the data is not committed nor persisted until Commit is called
			respTxs[i] = &abci.ExecTxResult{Code: abci.CodeTypeOK}
			app.state.Size++
		}
	}
	app.state.Height = req.Height

	response := &abci.FinalizeBlockResponse{TxResults: respTxs, AppHash: app.state.Hash()}
	return response, nil
}
```

**Explanation of code:**

`FinalizeBlock` function iterates over the transactions (`req.Txs`) in the block. If a transaction is a ban transaction (`isBanTx(tx)`),
it updates or sets a user in the application's database and assigns a response code. If it is not a ban transaction, the loop breaks.

After the ban transactions, the method parses the remaining transactions using `model.ParseMessage(tx)`. It updates or sets

> the sender as a user in the database, appends the message to the existing messages, appends the message to the chat history,

Reviewer: > appends the message to the existing messages

Why do we do that (trying to understand)?

Reviewer 2: I think the way the logic to have Ban Tx and "regular" Tx could be improved in the future imo. I'd leave like that for now, might not be optimal but I'd consider this as an future enhancement.

*Tip: The function `FinalizeBlock` finalizes processing of a tx. All the state change that happen in this function are finalized.
However, they are not yet persisted to database. This is done in next step, i.e. `Commit`*

Note: You will learn about different packages and functions like `model.AppendToExistingMsgs` in the upcoming sections.
In this section you will learn about `app.go` file only.

## Commit

The `Commit` method is used to persist the changes made to the application state during the FinalizeBlock method.

After calling `FinalizeBlock`, the state changes are finalized but not yet persisted to the database. The `Commit` method
is responsible for persisting these changes to the database, ensuring that they are durable and can be retrieved later.

Typically, the `Commit` method updates the application's blockchain state by saving the modified data to a persistent
storage system, such as a database or a file. This allows the application to maintain a consistent and reliable state
across different blocks in the blockchain.

The Commit method takes in a `CommitRequest` object and returns a `CommitResponse` object, which can include information

> about the `commit` process, such as the new state hash or any errors that occurred during the commit.

Reviewer: The hash has been moved to `FinalizeBlock` in `v0.38.x`

Reviewer 2: Thanks, removed that information. 

By the way, noticed the `/spec/core/state` doc has some old data for CommitResponse, I've added that into an [issue](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/issues/2834) I had opened to fix this page

**Following is the code for the `Commit` function:**

```go
// Commit the application state
func (app *ForumApp) Commit(_ context.Context, _ *abci.CommitRequest) (*abci.CommitResponse, error) {
	fmt.Println("Executing Application Commit")

	if err := app.onGoingBlock.Commit(); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

> 	saveState(&app.state)

Reviewer: Are we saving anything outside the DB? That's looking for trouble: what if the process crashes between lines 359 and 360?

Reviewer 2: In the line `357`, the `Commit()` will persist in the DB all the txs that were added in the batch in FinalizeBlock. If any tx fails to save in the DB it will panic. If it's all good, then it saves the state in the DB via `saveState` method. So the status is saved in the DB only if all the txs succeed in saving to the DB. Does that makes sense? Is this OK?

# Send Message

**In this section you will learn how a user can send a message on the Forum Application.**

## CheckTx

> In ABCI, the `CheckTx` method is used to check the validity of an individual transaction before it is included in the mempool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ABCI, the `CheckTx` method is used to ask the application to check the validity of an individual transaction before it is included in the mempool.
```

Every node runs CheckTx before letting a transaction into its local mempool.

The `CheckTx` method is responsible for performing any necessary validation checks on the transaction, such as verifying
the signature, checking for double spending, or enforcing application-specific rules. It is a lightweight and fast
operation, as it is meant to quickly determine whether a transaction is valid or not.

> The method takes in a `RequestCheckTx` object, which contains the transaction to be checked (`req.Tx`) and any other

Reviewer: You are using `Request*` and `Response*` at several places in this tutorial. However, as of `v1.x` this has changed to `*Request` and `*Response` (so, suffixes rather than prefixes)

relevant information that the application needs to validate the transaction.

The `CheckTx` method should return a `ResponseCheckTx` object, which indicates whether the transaction is valid or not.

> If the transaction is valid, the response may include additional information about the transaction
> or any changes to the application state resulting from the validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transaction is valid, the response may include additional information about the transaction
such as the gas that the submitter is willing to spend executing the transaction.
```

Finally, the method returns an empty `*abci.CommitResponse` object and a `nil` error.

## Signature verification

The tutorial does not include the logic for verifying transaction signatures. However, in a real-world application, it
is important to validate transaction signatures to ensure that the users sending messages are legitimate and not trying

> to exploit the system. If implemented, signature verification would typically be carried out using the `CheckTx` and `FinalizeBlock`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to exploit the system. If implemented, signature verification would typically be carried out using the `CheckTx`, `ProcessProposal`, and `FinalizeBlock`
```
